"Return to Steve Plimpton's home page"_main.html :c

:line

ChISELS - Chemically Induced Surface Evolution with Level Sets :h3

ChISELS is a simulation code developed to model the etching and growth
of semiconductor surfaces as they are processed to create micromachine
devices (MEMS).  It does aaptive gridding and level set tracking in
either 2d or 3d.

Larry Musson (lcmusso at sandia.gov) at Sandia is the lead developer for
ChISELS.  My contribution is in the algorithms and implementation of
the parallel level set solver and associated octtree data structure
used to store and track the surface as it evolves.

In a related effort, I worked with Craig Jorgensen and Rod Schmidt to
create a parallel geometric modeler for MEMS designers.  We used PVM
(parallel virtual machine) to partition the modeling tasks
geometrically into sub-pieces and distribute them across processors of
a workstation cluster.  This enabled large 3d models to be constructed
from mask sets considerably more quickly.

Collaborators on these projects:

  Larry Musson, Sandia
  Rod Schmidt, Sandia
  Pauline Ho, Reaction Design
  Craig Jorgensen, Sandia :ul
 
:line

This paper describes ChISELS and its basic algorithms and application
to semiconductor deposition processes commonly used for MEMS
fabrication:

[Feature Length-Scale Modeling of LPCVD and PECVD MEMS Fabrication
Processes], L. C. Musson, P. Ho, S. J. Plimpton, R. C. Schmidt,
Journal of Microsystems Technologies, 12, 137-142
(2005). ("abstract"_ajmt)

:link(ajmt,abstracts/jmt05.html)

:line

This conference paper describes the parallelization of the MEMS
geometric modeler:

[Development and Performance of a PVM Based Parallel Geometric Modeler
for MEMS], C. Jorgensen, D. Melander, R. Schmidt, S. J. Plimpton, in
Proc of Modeling and Simulation of Microsystems (MSM), Puerto Rico,
April 2002, 218-221. ("abstract"_amsm)

:link(amsm,abstracts/msm02.html)
