[Length scale and time scale effects on the plastic flow of FCC
metals]

M. F. Horstemeyer, M. I. Baskes, S. J. Plimpton, Acta Materialia, 49,
4363-4374 (2001).

We examine size scale and strain rate effects on single-crystal
face-centered cubic (fee) metals. To study yield and work hardening,
we perform simple shear molecular dynamics simulations using the
embedded atom method (EAM) on single-crystal nickel ranging from 100
atoms to 100 million atoms and at strain rates ranging from 10{sup 7}
to 10{sup 12} s{sup -1}. We compare our atomistic simulation results
with experimental data obtained from interfacial force microscopy
(IFM), nano-indentation, micro-indentation and small-scale
torsion. The data are found to scale with a geometric length scale
parameter defined by the ratio of volume to surface area of the
samples. The atomistic simulations reveal that dislocations nucleating
at free surfaces are critical to causing micro-yield and macro-yield
in pristine material. The increase of flow stress at increasing strain
rates results from phonon drag, and a simple model is developed to
demonstrate this effect. Another important aspect of this study
reveals that plasticity as reflected by the global averaged
stress-strain behavior is characterized by four different length
scales: (1) below 10{sup 4} atoms, (2) between 10{sup 4} and 10{sup 6}
atoms (2 mu m), (3) between 2 mu m and 300 mu m, and (4) above 300 mu
m.

Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
