[Statistical ensemble analysis for simulating extrinsic noise-driven
response in NF-kappa B signaling networks]

J. Joo, S. J. Plimpton, J. L. Faulon, BMC Systems Biology, 7, 45
(2013).

Background: Gene expression profiles and protein dynamics in single
cells have a large cell-to-cell variability due to intracellular
noise. Intracellular fluctuations originate from two sources:
intrinsic noise due to the probabilistic nature of biochemical
reactions and extrinsic noise due to randomized interactions of the
cell with other cellular systems or its environment. Presently, there
is no systematic parameterization and modeling scheme to simulate
cellular response at the single cell level in the presence of
extrinsic noise.

Results: In this paper, we propose a novel statistical ensemble method
to simulate the distribution of heterogeneous cellular responses in
single cells. We capture the effects of extrinsic noise by randomizing
values of the model parameters. In this context, a statistical
ensemble is a large number of system replicates, each with randomly
sampled model parameters from biologically feasible intervals. We
apply this statistical ensemble approach to the well-studied NF-kappa
B signaling system. We predict several characteristic dynamic features
of NF-kappa B response distributions; one of them is the
dosage-dependent distribution of the first translocation time of
NF-kappa B.

Conclusion: The distributions of heterogeneous cellular responses that
our statistical ensemble formulation generates reveal the effect of
different cellular conditions, e.g., effects due to wild type versus
mutant cells or between different dosages of external
stimulants. Distributions generated in the presence of extrinsic noise
yield valuable insight into underlying regulatory mechanisms, which
are sometimes otherwise hidden.

Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
