[Parallel Strategies for Crash and Impact Simulations]

K. Brown, S. Attaway, S. J. Plimpton, B. Hendrickson, Computer Methods
in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 184, 375-390 (2000).

We describe a general strategy we have found effective for
parallelizing solid mechanics simulations. Such simulations often have
several computationally intensive parts, including finite element
integration, detection of material contacts, and particle interaction
if smoothed particle hydrodynamics is used to model highly deforming
materials. The need to balance all of these computations
simultaneously is a difficult challenge that has kept many commercial
and government codes from being used effectively on parallel
supercomputers with hundreds or thousands of processors. Our strategy
is to load-balance each of the significant computations independently
with whatever balancing technique is most appropriate. The chief
benefit is that each computation can be scalably parallelized. The
drawback is the data exchange between processors and extra coding that
must be written to maintain multiple decompositions in a single
code. We discuss these trade-offs and give performance results showing
this strategy has led to a parallel implementation of a widely-used
solid mechanics code that can now be run efficiently on thousands of
processors of the Pentium-based Sandia/Intel TFLOPS machine. We
illustrate with several examples the kinds of high-resolution,
million-element models that can now be simulated routinely. We also
look to the future and discuss what possibilities this new capability
promises, as well as the new set of challenges it poses in material
models, computational techniques, and computing infrastructure.

Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
