[Accurate and Efficient Methods for Modeling Colloidal Mixtures in an
Explicit Solvent using Molecular Dynamics]

P. J. in 't Veld, S. J. Plimpton, G. S. Grest, Comp Phys Comm, 179,
320-329 (2008).

Most simulations of colloidal suspensions treat the solvent implicitly
or as a continuum.  However as particle size decreases to the
nanometer scale, this approximation fails and one needs to treat the
solvent explicitly.  Due to the large number of smaller solvent
particles, such simulations are computationally challenging.
Additionally, as the ratio of nanoparticle size to solvent size
increases, commonly-used molecular dynamics algorithms for neighbor
finding and parallel communication become inefficient.  Here we
present modified algorithms that enable fast single processor
performance and reasonable parallel scalability for mixtures with a
wide range of particle size ratios.  The methods developed are
applicable for any system with widely varying force distance cutoffs,
independent of particle sizes and independent of the interaction
potential.  As a demonstration of the new algorithm's effectiveness,
we present results for the pair correlation function and diffusion
constant for mixtures where colloidal particles interact via
integrated potentials.  In these systems, with nanoparticles 20 times
larger than the surrounding solvent particles, our parallel molecular
dynamics code runs more than 100 times faster using the new
algorithms.

Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
