[Implementing Molecular Dynamics on Hybrid High Performance Computers
- Short Range Forces]

W. M. Brown, P. Wang, S. J. Plimpton,
A. N. Tharrington, Comp Phys Comm, 182, 898-911, (2011).

The use of accelerators such as graphics processing units (GPUs) has
become popular in scientific computing applications due to their low
cost, impressive floating-point capabilities, high memory bandwidth,
and low electrical power requirements. Hybrid high-performance
computers, machines with more than one type of floating-point
processor, are now becoming more prevalent due to these advantages. In
this work, we discuss several important issues in porting a large
molecular dynamics code for use on parallel hybrid machines â€“ (1)
choosing a hybrid parallel decomposition that works on central
processing units (CPUs) with distributed memory and accelerator cores
with shared memory, (2) minimizing the amount of code that must be
ported for efficient acceleration, (3) utilizing the available
processing power from both multi-core CPUs and accelerators, and (4)
choosing a programming model for acceleration. We present our solution
to each of these issues for short-range force calculation in the
molecular dynamics package LAMMPS, however, the methods can be applied
in many molecular dynamics codes. Specifically, we describe algorithms
for efficient short range force calculation on hybrid high-performance
machines. We describe an approach for dynamic load balancing of work
between CPU and accelerator cores. We describe the Geryon library that
allows a single code to compile with both CUDA and OpenCL for use on a
variety of accelerators. Finally, we present results on a parallel
test cluster containing 32 Fermi GPUs and 180 CPU cores.

Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
