[Particle dynamics modeling methods for colloid suspensions]

D. S. Bolintineanu, G. S. Grest, J. B. Lechman, F. Pierce,
S. J. Plimpton, and P. R. Schunk, Computational Particle Mechanics, 1,
321-356 (2014).

We present a review and critique of several meth- ods for the
simulation of the dynamics of colloidal sus- pensions at the
mesoscale. We focus particularly on simu- lation techniques for
hydrodynamic interactions, including implicit solvents (Fast
Lubrication Dynamics, an approxi- mation to Stokesian Dynamics) and
explicit/particle-based solvents (Multi-Particle Collision Dynamics
and Dissipative Particle Dynamics). Several variants of each method
are com- pared quantitatively for the canonical system of monodis-
perse hard spheres, with a particular focus on diffusion char-
acteristics, as well as shear rheology and microstructure. In all
cases, we attempt to match the relevant properties of a
well-characterized solvent, which turns out to be challeng- ing for
the explicit solvent models. Reasonable quantitative agreement is
observed among all methods, but overall the Fast Lubrication Dynamics
technique shows the best accu- racy and performance. We also devote
significant discussion to the extension of these methods to more
complex situa- tions of interest in industrial applications, including
models for non-Newtonian solvent rheology, non-spherical particles,
drying and curing of solvent and flows in complex geome- tries. This
work identifies research challenges and motivates future efforts to
develop techniques for quantitative, predic- tive simulations of
industrially relevant colloidal suspension processes.

Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
