[Molecular-Dynamics Simulations of Low-Energy (25-200 eV) Argon Ion
Interactions with Silicon Surfaces: Sputter Yields and Product
Formation Pathways]

N. A. Kubota, D. J. Economou, S. J. Plimpton, J of Appl Phys, 83,
4055-4063 (1998).

The etch yield and subsurface damage are important issues in low
energy (< 200 eV) ion interactions with surfaces. In particular,
atomic layer etching requires etching of electronic materials with
monolayer precision and minimal interlayer atomic mixing. In this
study, the molecular dynamics technique is used to simulate the impact
of argon ions on chlorine-free and chlorine- passivated silicon
surfaces, under conditions relevant to atomic layer etching.
Thousands of individual ion impact simulations are performed on a
massively parallel supercomputer. The silicon sputter yield is
obtained for Ar ion energies ranging from 25 to 200 eV. Where
possible, simulation results are compared to available experimental
data. Volatile product formation during ion bombardment of ordered
surfaces tends to follow distinct local trajectories.  For example,
the formation of products due to 120 eV Ar ions impacting onto Si
(001)(2x1) at normal incidence has been found to occur mainly by a
mechanism in which the Ar ion impacts directly in-between a surface
silicon dimer pair. The energetic recoiled silicon atoms undercut
nearby silicon atoms resulting in product formation. Several other
product formation pathways have also been observed.

Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
