[Parallel algorithms for hyperdynamics and local hyperdynamics]

S. J. Plimpton, D. Perez, A. F. Voter, J Chem Phys, 153, 054116
(2020).

Hyperdynamics (HD) is a method for accelerating the timescale of
standard molecular dynamics (MD). It can be used for simulations of
systems with an energy potential landscape that is a collection of
basins, separated by barriers, where transitions between basins are
infrequent. HD enables the system to escape from a basin more quickly
while enabling a statistically accurate renormalization of the
simulation time, thus effectively boosting the timescale of the
simulation. In the work of Kim et al. [J. Chem. Phys. 139, 144110
(2013)], a local version of HD was formulated, which exploits the
intrinsic locality characteristic typical of most systems to mitigate
the poor scaling properties of standard HD as the system size is
increased. Here, we discuss how both HD and local HD can be formulated
to run efficiently in parallel. We have implemented these ideas in the
LAMMPS MD code, which means HD can be used with any interatomic
potential LAMMPS supports. Together, these parallel methods allow
simulations of any size to achieve the time acceleration offered by HD
(which can be orders of magnitude), at a cost of 2-4x that of standard
MD. As examples, we performed two simulations of a million-atom system
to model the diffusion and clustering of Pt adatoms on a large patch
of the Pt(100) surface for 80 mu s and 160 mu s.

Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
