[Parallel Sn Sweeps on Unstructured Grids: Algorithms for
Prioritization, Grid Partitioning, and Cycle-Detection]

S. J. Plimpton, B. Hendrickson, S. Burns, W. Mclendon III, L.
Rauchwerger, Nuclear Science and Engineering, 150, 267-283 (2005).

The method of discrete ordinates is commonly used to solve the
Boltzmann transport equation.  The solution in each ordinate direction
is most efficiently computed by sweeping the radiation flux across the
computational grid.  For unstructured grids this poses many
challenges, particularly when implemented on distributed-memory
parallel machines where the grid geometry is spread across processors.
We present several algorithms relevant to this approach: (a) an
asynchronous message-passing algorithm that performs sweeps
simultaneously in multiple ordinate directions, (b) a simple geometric
heuristic to prioritize the computational tasks that a processor works
on, (c) a partitioning algorithm that creates columnar-style
decompositions for unstructured grids, and (d) an algorithm for
detecting and eliminating cycles which sometimes exist in unstructured
grids and can prevent sweeps from successfully completing.  Algorithms
(a) and (d) are fully parallel; algorithms (b) and (c) can be used in
conjunction with (a) to achieve higher parallel efficiencies.  We
describe our message-passing implementations of these algorithms
within a radiation transport package.  Performance and scalability
results are given for unstructured grids with up to 3 million elements
(500 million unknowns) running on thousands of processors of Sandia's
Intel Tflops machine and DEC-Alpha CPlant cluster.

Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
