[Effect of Interatomic Potential on Simulated Grain-Boundary and Bulk
Diffusion: A Molecular-Dynamics Study]

S. J. Plimpton and E. D. Wolf, Phys Rev B, 41, 2712-2721 (1990).

Molecular-dynamics methods are used to model diffusion in a Sigma 5
(100) A1 tilt boundary and in bulk. The diffusion coefficient D and
activation energy Q for atoms in the boundary and in bulk are
calculated for several different A1 empirical interatomic pair
potentials. These include a Morse potential, spline potentials fitted
to bulk experimental data (elastic constants, phonon spectra, etc.),
and a pseudopotential. Reasonable agreement is obtained with
experimental diffusion values for A1, although activation energies are
low.  There is also a wide variation in results from one potential to
another because the atomic motion is sensitive to the shape of the
primary well or minimum of the interatomic potential. Rescaling the
data with rough estimates of the different bulk melting temperatures
that each potential predicts reduces the discrepancy between
potentials. This is shown to be true for virtually any pair potential
by calculating diffusion rates for Morse potentials with changing
potential-well depth, position, and width. The variations between
potentials are also explained in a quantitative sense by a simple
calculation of potential-energy-barrier height for vacancy migration
in a bulk model. A method is given for using a linear relation between
barrier height and melting temperature to predict diffusion
coefficients and general transport properties in grain boundaries and
bulk for any pair potential in any fcc metal.

Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
