[No-slip boundary conditions and forced flow in multiparticle
collision dynamics]

D. S. Bolintineanu, J. B. Lechman, S. J. Plimpton, and G. S. Grest,
Phys Rev E, 86, 066703 (2012).

Multiparticle collision dynamics (MPCD) is a particle-based fluid
simulation technique that is becoming increasingly popular for
mesoscale fluid modeling. However, some confusion and conflicting
results persist in literature regarding several important
methodological details, in particular the enforcement of the no-slip
condition and thermostatting in forced flow. These issues persist in
simple flows past stationary boundaries, which we exclusively focus on
here. We discuss the parametrization of MPCD fluids and its
consequences for fluid-solid boundaries in great detail, and show that
the method of virtual particles proposed by Lamura et al. and adopted
by many others is required only for parameter choices that lead to
viscosities dominated by collisional contributions. We test several
implementations of the virtual particle method and discuss how to
completely eliminate slip at stationary boundaries. We also show that
stochastic boundary reflection rules are inherently problematic for
forced flow and suggest a possible remedy. Finally, we discuss the
most robust way to achieve forced flow and evaluate several
thermostatting methods in the process. All discussion is limited to
solid objects that do not move as a result of collisions with MPCD
particles (i.e., walls). However, the results can be extended to
solutes that experience forces and torques due to interactions with
MPCD particles (e.g., colloids). The detailed analysis presented for
this simple case provides the level of rigor and accuracy to the MPCD
method required for the study of more complex systems.

Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
